[EX-2942] Add Metric Property Breakouts documentation (#37714)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/experiments/metric_property_breakouts.md

<div class="alert alert-info">Metric property breakouts split a metric by the event properties you configure on the metric. To compare results by attributes captured when a subject was first exposed (such as a user's region or whether they are a new visitor), use <a href="/experiments/reading_results/#segment-level-results">segment-level results</a> instead.</div>

## Configure breakouts on a metric

You define breakouts when you [create or edit a metric][1]. Breakouts are supported for metrics built on Product Analytics, Real User Monitoring (RUM), and [warehouse][2] data.

1. Navigate to the [Metrics page][3] in Datadog Product Analytics and create a new metric or open an existing one.
1. Configure the [metric definition][1].
1. In the {{< ui >}}Split by Metric Properties{{< /ui >}} section, click {{< ui >}}Add Property{{< /ui >}}.
1. Select a {{< ui >}}Property{{< /ui >}} to break out by (for example, **Country**, **Device Type**, or **Browser**). The available properties come from the metric's data source. For warehouse metrics, the property must be a column on the metric's [SQL model][2].

> 1. In the {{< ui >}}Values{{< /ui >}} column, select the property values you want to break out (for example, **CA**, **US**, and **UK**). Datadog lists up to 50 of the most frequently observed values for the property, ordered by frequency.

Reviewer: We should call out how values are calculated somewhere in this doc. Do we have any method for troubleshooting that job? Showing errors to the user if any occurred or letting them manually invoke the job? Any way to see the list of values and number of occurrences?

Author: Good call — added a **How property values are discovered** subsection (commit 8670866) covering exactly this: Datadog keeps the **50 most-frequent values per property over a trailing 30-day window**, ordered by frequency, and **refreshes the list once per day**.

On the rest of the questions: none of these are surfaced to users today. For the record:

- **Troubleshooting / showing errors:** There's no user-facing status or error surface for the discovery job. It runs as a backend (Temporal cron) job; failures only show up in internal pipeline/Temporal run state — never on the property or the `/values` API. The only error the metric form shows is a generic `Unable to load metric property values` toast if the values *fetch* itself fails.
- **Manually invoking the job:** No manual "refresh values" control for Datadog metric properties — they only refresh on the daily tick. Warehouse properties refresh automatically as a side effect of creating/updating the warehouse metric source, but there's still no standalone re-run button.
- **Seeing values + occurrence counts:** The `/values` API does return a per-value `count` (and sorts by it descending), but the metric form's Values picker currently renders only the value strings — the counts aren't displayed in the UI.

These items would be scope for further work if we wanted to add them.

---

> title: Metric Property Breakouts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Break Out Metrics by Property
```

Reviewer 2: see comment in `main.en.yaml`

description: Break out an experiment metric by the values of an event property to compare lift across segments without creating a separate metric for each value.
further_reading:
- link: "/experiments/defining_metrics/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Create Experiment Metrics"
- link: "/experiments/reading_results/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Reading Experiment Results"

> - link: "/experiments/analysis_methods/"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- link: "/experiments/statistics/analysis_methods/"
```

  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Analysis Methods"
---

## Overview

A single metric often hides meaningful differences between segments of your users. A change that lifts revenue overall might help users on one device type while hurting users on another, and an aggregate result averages those effects together.

> Metric property breakouts let you split a metric by the values of an event property—such as country, device type, or browser—so you can see the lift and confidence interval for each value alongside the overall result. You configure the properties and values you care about once on the metric, and Datadog computes a separate result for each value using the same analysis as the parent metric.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metric property breakouts let you split a metric by the values of an event property-such as country, device type, or browser. This shows you the lift and confidence interval for each value alongside the overall result. You configure the properties and values you care about once on the metric. Datadog computes a separate result for each value, using the same analysis as the parent metric.
```

A breakout is purely additive: the overall metric is still calculated across all events, and each property value is reported as its own row underneath it.

<div class="alert alert-info">Metric property breakouts split a metric by the event properties you configure on the metric. To compare results by attributes captured when a subject was first exposed (such as a user's region or whether they are a new visitor), use <a href="/experiments/reading_results/#segment-level-results">segment-level results</a> instead.</div>

## Configure breakouts on a metric

You define breakouts when you [create or edit a metric][1]. Breakouts are supported for metrics built on Product Analytics, Real User Monitoring (RUM), and [warehouse][2] data.

> 1. Navigate to the [Metrics page][3] in Datadog Product Analytics and create a new metric or open an existing one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the [Metrics page][3] in Datadog Product Analytics and create a metric or open an existing one.
```

### Break out exploration charts

When you [explore results][4] in a chart, use the {{< ui >}}Split by{{< /ui >}} selector and choose {{< ui >}}Metric property{{< /ui >}} followed by the property name to plot each property value as a separate series.

## How breakouts are calculated

For each property value you select, Datadog creates a *sub-metric*: a copy of the parent metric with an additional filter that keeps only the events where the property equals that value. For example, a breakout on `Country = US` analyzes the parent metric using only events where the country is `US`.

Each sub-metric flows through the same analysis pipeline as the parent metric, so every breakout value receives its own lift estimate, confidence interval, [CUPED][5] adjustment, and significance test, computed on its filtered subpopulation. The [analysis method][5] and confidence level configured for the experiment apply to every breakout.

Because each breakout analyzes a subset of the data, breakouts have smaller sample sizes than the parent metric. A breakout value may need more data than the overall metric to reach statistical significance.

## Supported metrics and constraints

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Metric property breakouts have the following requirements and limitations:
```

| Aspect | Support |
|---|---|

> | **Metric types** | Simple, ratio, and percentile metrics. Cross-source ratio metrics (where the numerator and denominator come from different data sources) are not supported. |

Reviewer 2: what do we mean by "simple" here? https://docs.datadoghq.com/experiments/defining_metrics mentions Count, Sum, Percentile, Average, and Radio metrics but nothing about simple.

Author: Good catch — "simple" was not a documented term. I updated the row to use the aggregation-method names from [Create Experiment Metrics](https://docs.datadoghq.com/experiments/defining_metrics/#aggregation-methods): **Count, sum, average, percentile, and ratio metrics** (cross-source ratio metrics excluded).

Author: Correction to my note above: count/sum/average/percentile are [aggregation methods](https://docs.datadoghq.com/experiments/defining_metrics/#aggregation-methods), not metric types. Reworded the row to say breakouts support metrics using any aggregation method, as well as [ratio metrics](https://docs.datadoghq.com/experiments/defining_metrics/#ratio-metrics) (cross-source ratio metrics excluded).

| **Data sources** | Product Analytics, RUM, and warehouse metrics. |
| **Properties** | The property must belong to the metric's data source. |
| **Values** | Select from the values Datadog discovers for the property (up to 50 of the most frequent values). |
| **Results view** | Breakouts appear in the confidence-interval view of experiment results. |

**Note**: [Outlier handling (winsorization)][1] configured on the parent metric is not applied to breakouts, because a threshold computed across the full population is not meaningful for a filtered subpopulation.

## Further reading

{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}

[1]: /experiments/defining_metrics/
[2]: /experiments/defining_metrics/?tab=warehouse#create-a-sql-model
[3]: https://app.datadoghq.com/product-analytics/experimentation-metrics
[4]: /experiments/reading_results/

> [5]: /experiments/analysis_methods/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[5]: /experiments/statistics/analysis_methods/
```
